TERRAFORM

Terraform agentless, IAC

A. Understand Terraform is declarative:
Define “End state”
Focus on WHAT
Safe: Run twice = No Change
Understand how and why Infrastructure as Code is used
Create an account with a cloud provider

Hash Corp “Get stated” Tutorials

The core workflow: Terraform init, Terraform plan, Terraform apply
Managing change: manage infrastructure and collaborate using HCP Terraform

c.
Terraform is agentless, relate with multicloud services
Terraform is stateful: know the progress and state of infrastructure per time
Terraform is all in one place with version control
Terraform is declare the end state of the infrastructure and easy to make change
Terraform has no manual click-offs
Terraform saves money
Terraform is great for disaster recovery
Terraform minimize user errors.

Terraform file is called .tf file

Hands-on Terraform
Install Terraform: Follow steps as it is on their website: Harshicorp.com


sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y gnupg software-properties-common curl

curl -fsSL https://apt.releases.hashicorp.com/gpg \
  | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/hashicorp-archive-keyring.gpg

echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/hashicorp-archive-keyring.gpg] \
https://apt.releases.hashicorp.com $(. /etc/os-release && echo $VERSION_CODENAME) main" \
  | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/hashicorp.list


sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y terraform

REDHAT/CENTOS 10

$ sudo dnf install -y dnf-plugins-core
$ sudo dnf config-manager --add-repo https://rpm.releases.hashicorp.com/RHEL/hashicorp.repo
$ sudo dnf install -y terraform

# Confirm terraform installation 
$ terraform --version

Whenever you create a new configuration on terraform, you must initialize it by using:
 $ terraform init	in the Terraform directory	(Initializes your project)
 $ terraform plan	(takes your config and check it against the currently deployed state and your state file and 
			figure out the set of the sequence of things that need to happen to provision that infrastructure )
 $ terraform apply	To execute your .tf file on AWS / your cloud or onsite provider
 $ terraform destroy 	To destroy what you created in your provider


TERRAFORM-STATE-FILE is a JSON document that acts as Terraform's memory, recording the EXACT metadata and 
mapping of your configuration code to the real-world infrastructure resources deployed in your cloud provider. 
By default, it is saved in your local workspace directory under the name terraform.tfstate. 
It essentially functions as a JSON database storing THE LAST KNOWN state of your infrastructure code execution.


Key Functions of the State-File

• Resource Mapping: When you write code for a resource (e.g., an AWS EC2 instance), Terraform creates it and 
stores its real-world physical ID alongside your configuration name so it knows exactly which asset it manages.

• Tracking Metadata & Dependencies: It logs the order in which resources depend on one another, enabling safe 
parallel creation and correct ordering during destruction.

• Performance Caching: Instead of making hundreds of slow API requests to your cloud provider every
time you run a command, Terraform queries this file to quickly verify your infrastructure attributes.

• Determining Changes: During a terraform plan or terraform apply, Terraform uses the file to compare what you have
currently deployed against what you want in your configuration, calculating the net additions, deletions, or updates required.


Terraform MODULE is a collection of Terraform configuration files grouped together in a single directory. 
It acts as a reusable, self-contained building block for Infrastructure as Code (IaC), 
allowing you to package multiple related resources into a single logical unit.

Think of a module like a function in a traditional programming language: it takes input variables,
provisions a set of infrastructure components based on those inputs, and returns output values.

🧱 The Structure of a Module

At its simplest, any folder containing .tf files is a module. A standard, reusable child module typically includes three primary files:
• variables.tf (Inputs): Defines the parameters the module accepts, allowing consumers to customize its behavior.
• main.tf (Resources): Contains the actual resource blocks (e.g., EC2 instances, databases, networking) that will be deployed.
• outputs.tf (Outputs): Defines the values the module passes back out to the rest of your infrastructure config (like an IP address or database endpoint).


Module Hierarchy

Terraform relies on a PARENT-CHILD relationship to orchestrate configurations:
1. Root Module: The main working directory where you run commands like terraform plan and terraform apply.
		Every Terraform configuration has at least one root module.
2. Child Module: A separate module that is called from within the root module (or from another child module) using a module block.

TERRAFORM FILE BLOCKs can be broken down by their core function:

1. The Core Engines (Infrastructure & Providers)

These blocks interact directly with external APIs and define your actual infrastructure.

• resource: The building block of Terraform. It defines the specific infrastructure components you want to create and manage 
	(e.g., virtual machines, VPCs, databases).
• provider: Connects your code to target cloud platforms or services (e.g., AWS, Azure, Google Cloud). 
	It handles authentication and region specifications.
• data: Performs read-only operations to fetch existing resources or information from outside your current configuration 
	(e.g., querying an existing AMI ID or look up a subnet).


2. Data Flow & Reusability (Variables & Modules)

These blocks give your configurations flexibility, allow parameterized inputs, and support clean architecture.

• variable: Defines input variables. They act like function arguments, allowing you to pass dynamic values 
	into your module without hardcoding them.
• output: Defines return values that are displayed on the command line or exported for other
	Terraform configurations to read.
• locals: Declares local variables that assign a short name to an expression. These act like internal temporary 
	variables to avoid repeating complex expressions.
• module: Instantiates a reusable set of standard configurations from a separate directory or remote registry, 
	promoting "Don't Repeat Yourself" (DRY) principles.


3. Global Settings & Lifecycle Control

These blocks govern how Terraform itself behaves rather than managing individual cloud resources.

• terraform: Configures global Terraform behaviors. This is where you enforce the required engine version, 
	lock down external provider version requirements, and set up state management.
• backend: (Nested inside the terraform block) Dictates where your state file (.tfstate) is SAVED SECURELY, 
	such as an AWS S3 bucket or Azure Blob Storage. {This is remote storage of (.tfstate file)}
 Advantage of remote state-file storage:
		. Sensitive data encryption
		. Collaboration possible between developer
		. Automation Possible, GitHub action, CICD pipe-line
		. BUT increase complexity
• lifecycle: (Nested inside resource blocks) Overrides default resource management rules. 
	For instance, you can instruct Terraform to create_before_destroy or prevent_destroy to avoid downtime or accidents


API stands for Application Programming Interface. 

It is a software intermediary that allows two different applications to communicate and share data with each other.
Think of an API as a digital contract or a translator. It defines a strict set of rules, requests, and responses so that 
software built by different companies—using entirely different coding languages—can work together seamlessly behind the scenes
